README.md, before:

# Gentleman.Dots

<img width="2998" height="1649" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c5a1eae2-69de-4ca1-8b4d-9d9b56e4cb5a" />

## Description

This repository contains customized configurations for a complete development environment, including:

- Neovim, with LSP, autocompletion, and integrated AI assistants (Claude, Gemini)
- Fish
- Zsh
- **Nushell**
- Tmux
- Zellij
- Terminal emulators:
  - Alacritty
  - WezTerm
  - Kitty
  - Ghostty

You can choose between automatic and manual installation methods depending on your preference and operating system.

**Want the bleeding edge?** If you want access to the latest experimental features that I use in my daily workflow (macOS only), check out the `nix-migration` branch: https://github.com/Gentleman-Programming/Gentleman.Dots/tree/nix-migration

This branch contains cutting-edge configurations that eventually make their way to `main` once they're stable and tested. If you can't wait for the stable release and want the absolute latest features, this branch is incredible - just keep in mind it's macOS-focused and may have occasional instabilities.

**Important:** Windows users **must** follow the manual installation instructions before running the script.

## Installation (Automatic Recommended!)

### The Easy Way! Test the automated process and let the script do all the work for you 😘

The **automatic installation script** is the quickest and easiest way to set up your development environment. This script handles all the heavy lifting, but remember that you **must install the font** mentioned below before running it. The script is designed for macOS, Linux, and WSL systems. If you’re on Windows, you’ll need to follow the manual steps first before attempting to run this script.

```bash
curl -O https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Gentleman-Programming/Gentleman.Dots/refs/heads/main/install-linux-mac.sh

sudo chmod +x install-linux-mac.sh
bash ./install-linux-mac.sh
```

## Manual Installation

Welcome to the Gentleman.Dots manual configuration guide! This document will walk you through the steps required to set up your development environment.

**_Clone the repo before continuing!!!_**

```bash
git clone git@github.com:Gentleman-Programming/Gentleman.Dots.git
cd Gentleman.Dots
```

---

<details>
<summary>For Windows</summary>

**Important:** Windows users must follow these manual installation steps before running the automated script.

#### 1. Install WSL

WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) allows you to run Linux on Windows. Install it and set it to version 2:

```powershell
wsl --install
wsl --set-default-version 2
```

#### 2. Install a Linux Distribution

Install a Linux distribution (e.g., Ubuntu) in WSL:

```powershell
wsl --install -d Ubuntu
```

To list available distributions:

```powershell
wsl --list --online
```

Install your preferred distribution:

```powershell
wsl --install -d <distribution-name>
```

#### 3. Installing the Iosevka Font

The Iosevka Term Nerd Font is required for terminal emulators in this setup. On Windows, this installation must be done manually.

1. **Download the Iosevka font** from its official site or from [Nerd Fonts GitHub](https://github.com/ryanoasis/nerd-fonts).
2. **Extract the archive** and locate the font files (`.ttf` or `.otf`).
3. **Install the fonts**:
   - Right-click each font file and select **"Install for all users"** to install the font system-wide.

#### 4. Launch and Configure the Distribution

Open the installed distribution to complete setup. Update it with:

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
```

#### 5. Install a Terminal Emulator

Choose and install one of the following terminal emulators:

- **Alacritty**: [Download from GitHub Releases](https://github.com/alacritty/alacritty/releases) and place `alacritty.exe` in your `PATH`.
- **WezTerm**: [Download and Install](https://wezfurlong.org/wezterm/installation.html) and create an environment variable called `HOME` that resolves to `C:\Users\your-username`.
- **Kitty**: [Download and Install](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/#get-the-app).

#### 6. Configuration Transfer for Terminal Emulators

Using PowerShell:

**Alacritty Configuration**

```powershell
mkdir $env:APPDATA\alacritty
Copy-Item -Path alacritty.toml -Destination $env:APPDATA\alacritty\alacritty.toml

# In alacritty.toml, uncomment and set the shell program to WSL:

#[shell]
#program = "wsl.exe"
#args = ["--cd", "~"]
```

**WezTerm Configuration**

```powershell
Copy-Item -Path .wezterm.lua -Destination $HOME

# Uncomment for Windows settings in .wezterm.lua:

# config.default_domain = 'WSL:Ubuntu'
# config.front_end = "WebGpu"
# config.max_fps = 120
```

If WezTerm doesn't take the initial configuration:

- Create a `wezterm` folder in `C:\Users\your-username\.config`
- Copy `.wezterm.lua` into `wezterm.lua` inside that directory
- Restart WezTerm

**Kitty Configuration**

```powershell
Copy-Item -Path GentlemanKitty\* -Destination $HOME\.config\kitty -Recurse
```

#### 7. Install Chocolatey and win32yank

**Chocolatey** is a package manager for Windows that simplifies the installation of software.

**To install Chocolatey:**

- Open **PowerShell** as an administrator.
- Run the following command:

```powershell
Set-ExecutionPolicy Bypass -Scope Process -Force; `
[System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = `
[System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol -bor 3072; `
iwr https://community.chocolatey.org/install.ps1 -UseBasicParsing | iex
```

**To install win32yank:**

- After installing Chocolatey, run:

```powershell
choco install win32yank
```

**Note:** `win32yank` is required for clipboard integration in Neovim when using WSL.
</details>

---

<details>
<summary>For Linux, Arch Linux, macOS, and WSL</summary>

#### Prerequisites

- **macOS or Linux:** Ensure you have one of these operating systems.
- **Administrator privileges (sudo):** You'll need administrator access to install some tools.

#### 1. Install Dependencies

###### Arch Linux

```bash
sudo pacman -Syu --noconfirm
sudo pacman -S --needed --noconfirm base-devel curl file git wget
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
. $HOME/.cargo/env
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

###### Linux

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y build-essential curl file git
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
. $HOME/.cargo/env
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

###### Mac

```bash
xcode-select --install
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
. $HOME/.cargo/env
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

#### 2. Install Iosevka Term Nerd Font (icons and font style)

###### Arch Linux / Linux

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/fonts
wget -O ~/.local/share/fonts/Iosevka.zip https://github.com/ryanoasis/nerd-fonts/releases/download/v3.3.0/IosevkaTerm.zip
unzip ~/.local/share/fonts/Iosevka.zip -d ~/.local/share/fonts/
fc-cache -fv
```

###### Mac

```bash
brew tap homebrew/cask-fonts
brew install --cask font-iosevka-term-nerd-font
```

#### 3. Choose and Install Terminal Emulator

##### Alacritty

###### Arch Linux

```bash
sudo pacman -S --noconfirm alacritty
mkdir -p ~/.config/alacritty && cp alacritty.toml ~/.config/alacritty/alacritty.toml
```

###### Mac

```bash
brew install alacritty --cask
mkdir -p ~/.config/alacritty && cp alacritty.toml ~/.config/alacritty/alacritty.toml
```

###### Linux

```bash
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:aslatter/ppa; sudo apt update; sudo apt install alacritty
mkdir -p ~/.config/alacritty && cp alacritty.toml ~/.config/alacritty/alacritty.toml
```

##### WezTerm

###### Arch Linux

```bash
sudo pacman -S --noconfirm wezterm
mkdir -p ~/.config/wezterm && cp .wezterm.lua ~/.config/wezterm/wezterm.lua
```

###### Mac

```bash
brew install wezterm --cask
mkdir -p ~/.config/wezterm && cp .wezterm.lua ~/.config/wezterm/wezterm.lua
```

###### Linux

```bash
brew tap wez/wezterm-linuxbrew; brew install wezterm
mkdir -p ~/.config/wezterm && cp .wezterm.lua ~/.config/wezterm/wezterm.lua
```

##### Ghostty

###### Arch Linux

```bash
pacman -S ghostty
mkdir -p ~/.config/ghostty && cp -r GentlemanGhostty/* ~/.config/ghostty
```

###### Mac

```bash
brew install --cask ghostty
mkdir -p ~/.config/ghostty && cp -r GentlemanGhostty/* ~/.config/ghostty
```

###### Linux

```bash
brew install --cask ghostty
mkdir -p ~/.config/ghostty && cp -r GentlemanGhostty/* ~/.config/ghostty
```

##### Kitty

###### Mac

```bash
brew install --cask kitty
mkdir -p ~/.config/kitty && cp -r GentlemanKitty/* ~/.config/kitty
```

**Reload the config after install doing `ctrl+shift+,` | `cmd+shift+,`**

#### 4. Choose and Install a Shell

##### Nushell

###### 1. Step

```bash
cp -rf bash-env-json ~/.config/
cp -rf bash-env.nu ~/.config/
brew install nushell carapace zoxide atuin jq bash starship fzf
cp -rf starship.toml ~/.config/
```

###### 2. Step

**_Arch Linux / Linux_**

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/nushell
run_command "cp -rf GentlemanNushell/* ~/.config/nushell/"
```

**_Mac_**

```bash
mkdir -p ~/Library/Application\ Support/nushell

## udpate config to use mac
if grep -q "/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin" GentlemanNushell/env.nu; then
  awk -v search="/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin" -v replace="    | prepend '/opt/homebrew/bin'" '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' GentlemanNushell/env.nu > GentlemanNushell/env.nu.tmp && mv GentlemanNushell/env.nu.tmp GentlemanNushell/env.nu
else
  echo "    | prepend '/opt/homebrew/bin'" >> GentlemanNushell/env.nu
fi

cp -rf GentlemanNushell/* ~/Library/Application\ Support/nushell/
```

###### Fish + Starship

```bash
brew install fish carapace zoxide atuin starship fzf
mkdir -p ~/.cache/starship
mkdir -p ~/.cache/carapace
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/atuin
cp -rf starship.toml ~/.config/
cp -rf GentlemanFish/fish ~/.config
```

###### Zsh + Power10k\*\*

```bash
brew install zsh carapace zoxide atuin fzf
brew install zsh-autosuggestions zsh-syntax-highlighting zsh-autocomplete
mkdir -p ~/.cache/carapace
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/atuin
cp -rf GentlemanZsh/.zshrc ~/
cp -rf GentlemanZsh/.p10k.zsh ~/
cp -rf GentlemanZsh/.oh-my-zsh ~/
brew install powerlevel10k
```

#### 5. Choose and Install Window Manager

##### Tmux

```bash
brew install tmux
git clone https://github.com/tmux-plugins/tpm ~/.tmux/plugins/tpm
mkdir -p ~/.tmux
cp -r GentlemanTmux/.tmux/* ~/.tmux/
cp GentlemanTmux/.tmux.conf ~/
tmux new-session -d -s plugin-installation 'source ~/.tmux.conf; tmux run-shell ~/.tmux/plugins/tpm/bin/install_plugins'
tmux kill-session -t plugin-installation
```

##### Zellij

###### 1. Step => Install Zellij

```bash
cargo install zellij
mkdir -p ~/.config/zellij
cp -r GentlemanZellij/zellij/* ~/.config/zellij/
```

###### 2. Step => If you use ZSH

```bash
# update or replace TMUX
if grep -q "TMUX" ~/.zshrc; then
  awk -v search="TMUX" -v replace='WM_VAR="/$ZELLIJ"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.zshrc > ~/.zshrc.tmp && mv ~/.zshrc.tmp ~/.zshrc
else
  echo 'WM_VAR="/$ZELLIJ"' >> ~/.zshrc
fi

# update or replace tmux
if grep -q "tmux" ~/.zshrc; then
  awk -v search="tmux" -v replace='WM_CMD="zellij"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.zshrc > ~/.zshrc.tmp && mv ~/.zshrc.tmp ~/.zshrc
else
  echo 'WM_CMD="zellij"' >> ~/.zshrc
fi
```

###### 3. Step => If you use Fish

```bash
if grep -q "TMUX" ~/.config/fish/config.fish; then
  awk -v search="TMUX" -v replace="if not set -q ZELLIJ" '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.config/fish/config.fish > ~/.config/fish/config.fish.tmp && mv ~/.config/fish/config.fish.tmp ~/.config/fish/config.fish
else
  echo "if not set -q ZELLIJ" >> ~/.config/fish/config.fish
fi

# update or replace tmux
if grep -q "tmux" ~/.config/fish/config.fish; then
  awk -v search="tmux" -v replace="zellij" '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.config/fish/config.fish > ~/.config/fish/config.fish.tmp && mv ~/.config/fish/config.fish.tmp ~/.config/fish/config.fish
else
  echo "zellij" >> ~/.config/fish/config.fish
fi
```

###### 3. Step => If you use Nushell

**_Mac_**

```bash
# update or replace "tmux"
if grep -q '"tmux"' GentlemanNushell/config.nu; then
  awk -v search='"tmux"' -v replace='let MULTIPLEXER = "zellij"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' GentlemanNushell/config.nu > GentlemanNushell/config.nu.tmp && mv GentlemanNushell/config.nu.tmp GentlemanNushell/config.nu
else
  echo 'let MULTIPLEXER = "zellij"' >> GentlemanNushell/config.nu
fi

# update or replace "TMUX"
if grep -q '"TMUX"' GentlemanNushell/config.nu; then
  awk -v search='"TMUX"' -v replace='let MULTIPLEXER_ENV_PREFIX = "ZELLIJ"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' GentlemanNushell/config.nu > GentlemanNushell/config.nu.tmp && mv GentlemanNushell/config.nu.tmp GentlemanNushell/config.nu
else
  echo 'let MULTIPLEXER_ENV_PREFIX = "ZELLIJ"' >> GentlemanNushell/config.nu
fi

# copy files to nushell support directory
cp -rf GentlemanNushell/* ~/Library/Application\ Support/nushell/
```

**_Arch Linux / Linux_**

```bash
if grep -q '"tmux"' ~/.config/nushell/config.nu; then
  awk -v search='"tmux"' -v replace='let MULTIPLEXER = "zellij"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.config/nushell/config.nu > ~/.config/nushell/config.nu.tmp && mv ~/.config/nushell/config.nu.tmp ~/.config/nushell/config.nu
else
  echo 'let MULTIPLEXER = "zellij"' >> ~/.config/nushell/config.nu
fi

# update or replace "TMUX"
if grep -q '"TMUX"' ~/.config/nushell/config.nu; then
  awk -v search='"TMUX"' -v replace='let MULTIPLEXER_ENV_PREFIX = "ZELLIJ"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.config/nushell/config.nu > ~/.config/nushell/config.nu.tmp && mv ~/.config/nushell/config.nu.tmp ~/.config/nushell/config.nu
else
  echo 'let MULTIPLEXER_ENV_PREFIX = "ZELLIJ"' >> ~/.config/nushell/config.nu
fi
```

#### 6. Install NVIM

```bash
brew install nvim node npm git gcc fzf fd ripgrep coreutils bat curl lazygit tree-sitter
mkdir -p ~/.config/nvim
cp -r GentlemanNvim/nvim/* ~/.config/nvim/
# update or replace /your/notes/path
if grep -q "/your/notes/path" "$HOME/.config/nvim/lua/plugins/obsidian.lua"; then
  awk -v search="/your/notes/path" -v replace="path = '$OBSIDIAN_PATH'" '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' "$obsidian_config_file" > "${obsidian_config_file}.tmp" && mv "${obsidian_config_file}.tmp" "$obsidian_config_file"
else
  echo "path = '$OBSIDIAN_PATH'" >> "$obsidian_config_file"
fi
```

- **Manual Obsidian Configuration**

  To set up your Obsidian vault path in Neovim:

  1. **Create the directory for your Obsidian notes** (replace `/path/to/your/notes` with your desired path):

     ```bash
     mkdir -p /path/to/your/notes
     ```

  2. **Create a `templates` folder** inside your notes directory:

     ```bash
     mkdir -p /path/to/your/notes/templates
     ```

  3. **Edit the `obsidian.lua` file** to configure the vault path:

     ```bash
     nvim ~/.config/nvim/lua/plugins/obsidian.lua
     ```

  4. **Update the `path` setting** in `obsidian.lua`:

     ```lua
     path = "/path/to/your/notes",
     ```

  5. **Save and close** the file.

#### 7. Set Default Shell

###### 1. Step

**_ZSH_**

```bash
shell_path=$(which "zsh")
```

**_Fish_**

```bash
shell_path=$(which "fish")
```

**_Nushell_**

```bash
shell_path=$(which "nu")
```

###### 2. Step => Execute to Replace Default Shell

```bash
if [ -n "$shell_path" ]; then
  # Add shell to /etc/shells if not already present
  sudo sh -c "grep -Fxq \"$shell_path\" /etc/shells || echo \"$shell_path\" >> /etc/shells"

  # Change the default shell for the user
  sudo chsh -s "$shell_path" "$USER"

  # Verify if the shell has been changed
  if [ "$SHELL" != "$shell_path" ]; then
    echo -e "${RED}Error: Shell did not change. Please check manually.${NC}"
    echo -e "${GREEN}Command: sudo chsh -s $shell_path \$USER ${NC}"
  else
    echo -e "${GREEN}Shell changed to $shell_path successfully.${NC}"
  fi
else
  echo -e "${RED}Shell $shell_choice not found.${NC}"
fi

# Execute the chosen shell
exec $shell_choice
```

#### 8. Restart the Shell or Computer

- **Close and reopen your terminal**, or **restart your computer** or **WSL instance** for the changes to take effect.

---

You're done! You have manually configured your development environment following the Gentleman.Dots guide. Enjoy your new setup!

**Note:** If you encounter any problems during configuration, consult the official documentation of the tools or seek help online.

**Happy coding!**
</details>

---

## AI Configuration for Neovim

This configuration includes several AI assistants integrated with Neovim. By default, **Claude Code is enabled** as the primary AI assistant, while all other AI plugins are disabled.

### Available AI Assistants

The configuration includes support for the following AI tools:

- **Avante.nvim** - AI-powered coding assistant
- **CopilotChat.nvim** - GitHub Copilot chat interface
- **OpenCode.nvim** - OpenCode AI integration
- **CodeCompanion.nvim** - Multi-AI provider support
- **Claude Code.nvim** - Claude AI integration *(enabled by default)*
- **Gemini.nvim** - Google Gemini integration

### How to Switch AI Plugins

**Claude Code is already enabled by default.** To switch to a different AI assistant:

1. **Navigate to the disabled plugins file:**
   ```bash
   nvim ~/.config/nvim/lua/plugins/disabled.lua
   ```

2. **Disable Claude Code** by changing `enabled = true` to `enabled = false`:
   ```lua
   {
     "greggh/claude-code.nvim",
     enabled = false,  -- Disable Claude Code
   },
   ```

3. **Enable your preferred AI assistant** by changing `enabled = false` to `enabled = true`:

   ```lua
   {
     "yetone/avante.nvim",
     enabled = true,  -- Change to true to enable
   },
   ```

4. **Save the file** and restart Neovim.

### Important Notes

- **Only enable ONE AI plugin at a time** to avoid conflicts and keybinding issues
- **Required CLI tools** are automatically installed by the script:
  - Claude Code CLI (`brew install --cask claude-code`)
  - OpenCode CLI (`curl -fsSL https://opencode.ai/install | bash`)
  - Gemini CLI (`brew install gemini-cli`)
- **API keys may be required** for some services - check each plugin's documentation
- **Node.js 18+** is required for most AI plugins (automatically handled by the configuration)

### Switching Between AI Assistants

To switch from one AI assistant to another:

1. Set your current AI plugin to `enabled = false`
2. Set your desired AI plugin to `enabled = true`
3. Restart Neovim

### Recommended AI Assistants

- **For beginners:** Start with **CodeCompanion.nvim** - supports multiple AI providers
- **For Claude users:** Use **Claude Code.nvim** with the Claude Code CLI
- **For GitHub Copilot users:** Use **CopilotChat.nvim**
- **For Google Gemini users:** Use **Gemini.nvim** with the Gemini CLI

Commit message:

docs: agregar guía completa de Claude Code con shortcuts y comandos
- Crear CLAUDE_CODE_GUIDE.md con documentación exhaustiva:
  * Shortcuts de teclado y navegación
  * Comandos slash (built-in y personalizados)
  * Integración con Neovim
  * Instrucciones para crear comandos personalizados
  * Tips y mejores prácticas

- Actualizar README.md con sección de Claude Code Integration

- Crear estructura .claude/ con:
  * CLAUDE.md: Memoria del proyecto con convenciones y contexto
  * commands/: 5 comandos personalizados de ejemplo:
    - check-config.md: Verificación de configuraciones
    - update-nvim.md: Actualización de plugins
    - sync-dotfiles.md: Sincronización de dotfiles
    - review-code.md: Revisión exhaustiva de código
    - explain.md: Explicaciones detalladas de conceptos

Esta documentación proporciona una referencia completa para usar
Claude Code tanto desde terminal como integrado en Neovim.

README.md, after:

# Gentleman.Dots

<img width="2998" height="1649" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c5a1eae2-69de-4ca1-8b4d-9d9b56e4cb5a" />

## Description

This repository contains customized configurations for a complete development environment, including:

- Neovim, with LSP, autocompletion, and integrated AI assistants (Claude, Gemini)
- Fish
- Zsh
- **Nushell**
- Tmux
- Zellij
- Terminal emulators:
  - Alacritty
  - WezTerm
  - Kitty
  - Ghostty

You can choose between automatic and manual installation methods depending on your preference and operating system.

## Claude Code Integration

This configuration includes **Claude Code** integrated directly into Neovim! Claude Code is Anthropic's official CLI tool that brings AI-powered coding assistance to your terminal.

📚 **[Read the Complete Claude Code Guide](CLAUDE_CODE_GUIDE.md)** for:
- All keyboard shortcuts and commands
- How to use Claude Code in the terminal
- Custom slash commands and workflows
- Integration with Neovim
- Tips and best practices

**Quick Start in Neovim:**
- `<leader>ac` - Toggle Claude Code panel
- `<leader>as` - Send selected code to Claude
- `<leader>aa` - Accept suggested changes

**Want the bleeding edge?** If you want access to the latest experimental features that I use in my daily workflow (macOS only), check out the `nix-migration` branch: https://github.com/Gentleman-Programming/Gentleman.Dots/tree/nix-migration

This branch contains cutting-edge configurations that eventually make their way to `main` once they're stable and tested. If you can't wait for the stable release and want the absolute latest features, this branch is incredible - just keep in mind it's macOS-focused and may have occasional instabilities.

**Important:** Windows users **must** follow the manual installation instructions before running the script.

## Installation (Automatic Recommended!)

### The Easy Way! Test the automated process and let the script do all the work for you 😘

The **automatic installation script** is the quickest and easiest way to set up your development environment. This script handles all the heavy lifting, but remember that you **must install the font** mentioned below before running it. The script is designed for macOS, Linux, and WSL systems. If you’re on Windows, you’ll need to follow the manual steps first before attempting to run this script.

```bash
curl -O https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Gentleman-Programming/Gentleman.Dots/refs/heads/main/install-linux-mac.sh

sudo chmod +x install-linux-mac.sh
bash ./install-linux-mac.sh
```

## Manual Installation

Welcome to the Gentleman.Dots manual configuration guide! This document will walk you through the steps required to set up your development environment.

**_Clone the repo before continuing!!!_**

```bash
git clone git@github.com:Gentleman-Programming/Gentleman.Dots.git
cd Gentleman.Dots
```

---

<details>
<summary>For Windows</summary>

**Important:** Windows users must follow these manual installation steps before running the automated script.

#### 1. Install WSL

WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) allows you to run Linux on Windows. Install it and set it to version 2:

```powershell
wsl --install
wsl --set-default-version 2
```

#### 2. Install a Linux Distribution

Install a Linux distribution (e.g., Ubuntu) in WSL:

```powershell
wsl --install -d Ubuntu
```

To list available distributions:

```powershell
wsl --list --online
```

Install your preferred distribution:

```powershell
wsl --install -d <distribution-name>
```

#### 3. Installing the Iosevka Font

The Iosevka Term Nerd Font is required for terminal emulators in this setup. On Windows, this installation must be done manually.

1. **Download the Iosevka font** from its official site or from [Nerd Fonts GitHub](https://github.com/ryanoasis/nerd-fonts).
2. **Extract the archive** and locate the font files (`.ttf` or `.otf`).
3. **Install the fonts**:
   - Right-click each font file and select **"Install for all users"** to install the font system-wide.

#### 4. Launch and Configure the Distribution

Open the installed distribution to complete setup. Update it with:

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
```

#### 5. Install a Terminal Emulator

Choose and install one of the following terminal emulators:

- **Alacritty**: [Download from GitHub Releases](https://github.com/alacritty/alacritty/releases) and place `alacritty.exe` in your `PATH`.
- **WezTerm**: [Download and Install](https://wezfurlong.org/wezterm/installation.html) and create an environment variable called `HOME` that resolves to `C:\Users\your-username`.
- **Kitty**: [Download and Install](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/#get-the-app).

#### 6. Configuration Transfer for Terminal Emulators

Using PowerShell:

**Alacritty Configuration**

```powershell
mkdir $env:APPDATA\alacritty
Copy-Item -Path alacritty.toml -Destination $env:APPDATA\alacritty\alacritty.toml

# In alacritty.toml, uncomment and set the shell program to WSL:

#[shell]
#program = "wsl.exe"
#args = ["--cd", "~"]
```

**WezTerm Configuration**

```powershell
Copy-Item -Path .wezterm.lua -Destination $HOME

# Uncomment for Windows settings in .wezterm.lua:

# config.default_domain = 'WSL:Ubuntu'
# config.front_end = "WebGpu"
# config.max_fps = 120
```

If WezTerm doesn't take the initial configuration:

- Create a `wezterm` folder in `C:\Users\your-username\.config`
- Copy `.wezterm.lua` into `wezterm.lua` inside that directory
- Restart WezTerm

**Kitty Configuration**

```powershell
Copy-Item -Path GentlemanKitty\* -Destination $HOME\.config\kitty -Recurse
```

#### 7. Install Chocolatey and win32yank

**Chocolatey** is a package manager for Windows that simplifies the installation of software.

**To install Chocolatey:**

- Open **PowerShell** as an administrator.
- Run the following command:

```powershell
Set-ExecutionPolicy Bypass -Scope Process -Force; `
[System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = `
[System.Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol -bor 3072; `
iwr https://community.chocolatey.org/install.ps1 -UseBasicParsing | iex
```

**To install win32yank:**

- After installing Chocolatey, run:

```powershell
choco install win32yank
```

**Note:** `win32yank` is required for clipboard integration in Neovim when using WSL.
</details>

---

<details>
<summary>For Linux, Arch Linux, macOS, and WSL</summary>

#### Prerequisites

- **macOS or Linux:** Ensure you have one of these operating systems.
- **Administrator privileges (sudo):** You'll need administrator access to install some tools.

#### 1. Install Dependencies

###### Arch Linux

```bash
sudo pacman -Syu --noconfirm
sudo pacman -S --needed --noconfirm base-devel curl file git wget
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
. $HOME/.cargo/env
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

###### Linux

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y build-essential curl file git
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
. $HOME/.cargo/env
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

###### Mac

```bash
xcode-select --install
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
. $HOME/.cargo/env
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

#### 2. Install Iosevka Term Nerd Font (icons and font style)

###### Arch Linux / Linux

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/fonts
wget -O ~/.local/share/fonts/Iosevka.zip https://github.com/ryanoasis/nerd-fonts/releases/download/v3.3.0/IosevkaTerm.zip
unzip ~/.local/share/fonts/Iosevka.zip -d ~/.local/share/fonts/
fc-cache -fv
```

###### Mac

```bash
brew tap homebrew/cask-fonts
brew install --cask font-iosevka-term-nerd-font
```

#### 3. Choose and Install Terminal Emulator

##### Alacritty

###### Arch Linux

```bash
sudo pacman -S --noconfirm alacritty
mkdir -p ~/.config/alacritty && cp alacritty.toml ~/.config/alacritty/alacritty.toml
```

###### Mac

```bash
brew install alacritty --cask
mkdir -p ~/.config/alacritty && cp alacritty.toml ~/.config/alacritty/alacritty.toml
```

###### Linux

```bash
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:aslatter/ppa; sudo apt update; sudo apt install alacritty
mkdir -p ~/.config/alacritty && cp alacritty.toml ~/.config/alacritty/alacritty.toml
```

##### WezTerm

###### Arch Linux

```bash
sudo pacman -S --noconfirm wezterm
mkdir -p ~/.config/wezterm && cp .wezterm.lua ~/.config/wezterm/wezterm.lua
```

###### Mac

```bash
brew install wezterm --cask
mkdir -p ~/.config/wezterm && cp .wezterm.lua ~/.config/wezterm/wezterm.lua
```

###### Linux

```bash
brew tap wez/wezterm-linuxbrew; brew install wezterm
mkdir -p ~/.config/wezterm && cp .wezterm.lua ~/.config/wezterm/wezterm.lua
```

##### Ghostty

###### Arch Linux

```bash
pacman -S ghostty
mkdir -p ~/.config/ghostty && cp -r GentlemanGhostty/* ~/.config/ghostty
```

###### Mac

```bash
brew install --cask ghostty
mkdir -p ~/.config/ghostty && cp -r GentlemanGhostty/* ~/.config/ghostty
```

###### Linux

```bash
brew install --cask ghostty
mkdir -p ~/.config/ghostty && cp -r GentlemanGhostty/* ~/.config/ghostty
```

##### Kitty

###### Mac

```bash
brew install --cask kitty
mkdir -p ~/.config/kitty && cp -r GentlemanKitty/* ~/.config/kitty
```

**Reload the config after install doing `ctrl+shift+,` | `cmd+shift+,`**

#### 4. Choose and Install a Shell

##### Nushell

###### 1. Step

```bash
cp -rf bash-env-json ~/.config/
cp -rf bash-env.nu ~/.config/
brew install nushell carapace zoxide atuin jq bash starship fzf
cp -rf starship.toml ~/.config/
```

###### 2. Step

**_Arch Linux / Linux_**

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/nushell
run_command "cp -rf GentlemanNushell/* ~/.config/nushell/"
```

**_Mac_**

```bash
mkdir -p ~/Library/Application\ Support/nushell

## udpate config to use mac
if grep -q "/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin" GentlemanNushell/env.nu; then
  awk -v search="/home/linuxbrew/.linuxbrew/bin" -v replace="    | prepend '/opt/homebrew/bin'" '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' GentlemanNushell/env.nu > GentlemanNushell/env.nu.tmp && mv GentlemanNushell/env.nu.tmp GentlemanNushell/env.nu
else
  echo "    | prepend '/opt/homebrew/bin'" >> GentlemanNushell/env.nu
fi

cp -rf GentlemanNushell/* ~/Library/Application\ Support/nushell/
```

###### Fish + Starship

```bash
brew install fish carapace zoxide atuin starship fzf
mkdir -p ~/.cache/starship
mkdir -p ~/.cache/carapace
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/atuin
cp -rf starship.toml ~/.config/
cp -rf GentlemanFish/fish ~/.config
```

###### Zsh + Power10k\*\*

```bash
brew install zsh carapace zoxide atuin fzf
brew install zsh-autosuggestions zsh-syntax-highlighting zsh-autocomplete
mkdir -p ~/.cache/carapace
mkdir -p ~/.local/share/atuin
cp -rf GentlemanZsh/.zshrc ~/
cp -rf GentlemanZsh/.p10k.zsh ~/
cp -rf GentlemanZsh/.oh-my-zsh ~/
brew install powerlevel10k
```

#### 5. Choose and Install Window Manager

##### Tmux

```bash
brew install tmux
git clone https://github.com/tmux-plugins/tpm ~/.tmux/plugins/tpm
mkdir -p ~/.tmux
cp -r GentlemanTmux/.tmux/* ~/.tmux/
cp GentlemanTmux/.tmux.conf ~/
tmux new-session -d -s plugin-installation 'source ~/.tmux.conf; tmux run-shell ~/.tmux/plugins/tpm/bin/install_plugins'
tmux kill-session -t plugin-installation
```

##### Zellij

###### 1. Step => Install Zellij

```bash
cargo install zellij
mkdir -p ~/.config/zellij
cp -r GentlemanZellij/zellij/* ~/.config/zellij/
```

###### 2. Step => If you use ZSH

```bash
# update or replace TMUX
if grep -q "TMUX" ~/.zshrc; then
  awk -v search="TMUX" -v replace='WM_VAR="/$ZELLIJ"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.zshrc > ~/.zshrc.tmp && mv ~/.zshrc.tmp ~/.zshrc
else
  echo 'WM_VAR="/$ZELLIJ"' >> ~/.zshrc
fi

# update or replace tmux
if grep -q "tmux" ~/.zshrc; then
  awk -v search="tmux" -v replace='WM_CMD="zellij"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.zshrc > ~/.zshrc.tmp && mv ~/.zshrc.tmp ~/.zshrc
else
  echo 'WM_CMD="zellij"' >> ~/.zshrc
fi
```

###### 3. Step => If you use Fish

```bash
if grep -q "TMUX" ~/.config/fish/config.fish; then
  awk -v search="TMUX" -v replace="if not set -q ZELLIJ" '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.config/fish/config.fish > ~/.config/fish/config.fish.tmp && mv ~/.config/fish/config.fish.tmp ~/.config/fish/config.fish
else
  echo "if not set -q ZELLIJ" >> ~/.config/fish/config.fish
fi

# update or replace tmux
if grep -q "tmux" ~/.config/fish/config.fish; then
  awk -v search="tmux" -v replace="zellij" '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.config/fish/config.fish > ~/.config/fish/config.fish.tmp && mv ~/.config/fish/config.fish.tmp ~/.config/fish/config.fish
else
  echo "zellij" >> ~/.config/fish/config.fish
fi
```

###### 3. Step => If you use Nushell

**_Mac_**

```bash
# update or replace "tmux"
if grep -q '"tmux"' GentlemanNushell/config.nu; then
  awk -v search='"tmux"' -v replace='let MULTIPLEXER = "zellij"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' GentlemanNushell/config.nu > GentlemanNushell/config.nu.tmp && mv GentlemanNushell/config.nu.tmp GentlemanNushell/config.nu
else
  echo 'let MULTIPLEXER = "zellij"' >> GentlemanNushell/config.nu
fi

# update or replace "TMUX"
if grep -q '"TMUX"' GentlemanNushell/config.nu; then
  awk -v search='"TMUX"' -v replace='let MULTIPLEXER_ENV_PREFIX = "ZELLIJ"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' GentlemanNushell/config.nu > GentlemanNushell/config.nu.tmp && mv GentlemanNushell/config.nu.tmp GentlemanNushell/config.nu
else
  echo 'let MULTIPLEXER_ENV_PREFIX = "ZELLIJ"' >> GentlemanNushell/config.nu
fi

# copy files to nushell support directory
cp -rf GentlemanNushell/* ~/Library/Application\ Support/nushell/
```

**_Arch Linux / Linux_**

```bash
if grep -q '"tmux"' ~/.config/nushell/config.nu; then
  awk -v search='"tmux"' -v replace='let MULTIPLEXER = "zellij"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.config/nushell/config.nu > ~/.config/nushell/config.nu.tmp && mv ~/.config/nushell/config.nu.tmp ~/.config/nushell/config.nu
else
  echo 'let MULTIPLEXER = "zellij"' >> ~/.config/nushell/config.nu
fi

# update or replace "TMUX"
if grep -q '"TMUX"' ~/.config/nushell/config.nu; then
  awk -v search='"TMUX"' -v replace='let MULTIPLEXER_ENV_PREFIX = "ZELLIJ"' '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' ~/.config/nushell/config.nu > ~/.config/nushell/config.nu.tmp && mv ~/.config/nushell/config.nu.tmp ~/.config/nushell/config.nu
else
  echo 'let MULTIPLEXER_ENV_PREFIX = "ZELLIJ"' >> ~/.config/nushell/config.nu
fi
```

#### 6. Install NVIM

```bash
brew install nvim node npm git gcc fzf fd ripgrep coreutils bat curl lazygit tree-sitter
mkdir -p ~/.config/nvim
cp -r GentlemanNvim/nvim/* ~/.config/nvim/
# update or replace /your/notes/path
if grep -q "/your/notes/path" "$HOME/.config/nvim/lua/plugins/obsidian.lua"; then
  awk -v search="/your/notes/path" -v replace="path = '$OBSIDIAN_PATH'" '
  $0 ~ search {print replace; next}
  {print}
  ' "$obsidian_config_file" > "${obsidian_config_file}.tmp" && mv "${obsidian_config_file}.tmp" "$obsidian_config_file"
else
  echo "path = '$OBSIDIAN_PATH'" >> "$obsidian_config_file"
fi
```

- **Manual Obsidian Configuration**

  To set up your Obsidian vault path in Neovim:

  1. **Create the directory for your Obsidian notes** (replace `/path/to/your/notes` with your desired path):

     ```bash
     mkdir -p /path/to/your/notes
     ```

  2. **Create a `templates` folder** inside your notes directory:

     ```bash
     mkdir -p /path/to/your/notes/templates
     ```

  3. **Edit the `obsidian.lua` file** to configure the vault path:

     ```bash
     nvim ~/.config/nvim/lua/plugins/obsidian.lua
     ```

  4. **Update the `path` setting** in `obsidian.lua`:

     ```lua
     path = "/path/to/your/notes",
     ```

  5. **Save and close** the file.

#### 7. Set Default Shell

###### 1. Step

**_ZSH_**

```bash
shell_path=$(which "zsh")
```

**_Fish_**

```bash
shell_path=$(which "fish")
```

**_Nushell_**

```bash
shell_path=$(which "nu")
```

###### 2. Step => Execute to Replace Default Shell

```bash
if [ -n "$shell_path" ]; then
  # Add shell to /etc/shells if not already present
  sudo sh -c "grep -Fxq \"$shell_path\" /etc/shells || echo \"$shell_path\" >> /etc/shells"

  # Change the default shell for the user
  sudo chsh -s "$shell_path" "$USER"

  # Verify if the shell has been changed
  if [ "$SHELL" != "$shell_path" ]; then
    echo -e "${RED}Error: Shell did not change. Please check manually.${NC}"
    echo -e "${GREEN}Command: sudo chsh -s $shell_path \$USER ${NC}"
  else
    echo -e "${GREEN}Shell changed to $shell_path successfully.${NC}"
  fi
else
  echo -e "${RED}Shell $shell_choice not found.${NC}"
fi

# Execute the chosen shell
exec $shell_choice
```

#### 8. Restart the Shell or Computer

- **Close and reopen your terminal**, or **restart your computer** or **WSL instance** for the changes to take effect.

---

You're done! You have manually configured your development environment following the Gentleman.Dots guide. Enjoy your new setup!

**Note:** If you encounter any problems during configuration, consult the official documentation of the tools or seek help online.

**Happy coding!**
</details>

---

## AI Configuration for Neovim

This configuration includes several AI assistants integrated with Neovim. By default, **Claude Code is enabled** as the primary AI assistant, while all other AI plugins are disabled.

### Available AI Assistants

The configuration includes support for the following AI tools:

- **Avante.nvim** - AI-powered coding assistant
- **CopilotChat.nvim** - GitHub Copilot chat interface
- **OpenCode.nvim** - OpenCode AI integration
- **CodeCompanion.nvim** - Multi-AI provider support
- **Claude Code.nvim** - Claude AI integration *(enabled by default)*
- **Gemini.nvim** - Google Gemini integration

### How to Switch AI Plugins

**Claude Code is already enabled by default.** To switch to a different AI assistant:

1. **Navigate to the disabled plugins file:**
   ```bash
   nvim ~/.config/nvim/lua/plugins/disabled.lua
   ```

2. **Disable Claude Code** by changing `enabled = true` to `enabled = false`:
   ```lua
   {
     "greggh/claude-code.nvim",
     enabled = false,  -- Disable Claude Code
   },
   ```

3. **Enable your preferred AI assistant** by changing `enabled = false` to `enabled = true`:

   ```lua
   {
     "yetone/avante.nvim",
     enabled = true,  -- Change to true to enable
   },
   ```

4. **Save the file** and restart Neovim.

### Important Notes

- **Only enable ONE AI plugin at a time** to avoid conflicts and keybinding issues
- **Required CLI tools** are automatically installed by the script:
  - Claude Code CLI (`brew install --cask claude-code`)
  - OpenCode CLI (`curl -fsSL https://opencode.ai/install | bash`)
  - Gemini CLI (`brew install gemini-cli`)
- **API keys may be required** for some services - check each plugin's documentation
- **Node.js 18+** is required for most AI plugins (automatically handled by the configuration)

### Switching Between AI Assistants

To switch from one AI assistant to another:

1. Set your current AI plugin to `enabled = false`
2. Set your desired AI plugin to `enabled = true`
3. Restart Neovim

### Recommended AI Assistants

- **For beginners:** Start with **CodeCompanion.nvim** - supports multiple AI providers
- **For Claude users:** Use **Claude Code.nvim** with the Claude Code CLI
- **For GitHub Copilot users:** Use **CopilotChat.nvim**
- **For Google Gemini users:** Use **Gemini.nvim** with the Gemini CLI
